Introduction Mandiant recently responded to an incident at a critical infrastructure organization where an attacker deployed malware designed to manipulate industrial safety systems.
The targeted systems provided emergency shutdown capability for industrial processes.
We assess with moderate confidence that the attacker was developing the capability to cause physical damage and inadvertently shutdown operations.
This malware, which we call TRITON, is an attack framework built to interact with Triconex Safety Instrumented System (SIS) controllers.
We have not attributed the incident to a threat actor, though we believe the activity is consistent with a nation state preparing for an attack.
TRITON is one of a limited number of publicly identified malicious software families targeted at industrial control systems (ICS) .
It follows Stuxnet which was used against Iran in 2010 and Industroyer which we believe was deployed by Sandworm Team against Ukraine in 2016.
TRITON is consistent with these attacks, in that it could prevent safety mechanisms from executing their intended function, resulting in a physical consequence.
Malware Family Main Modules Description TRITON trilog.exe
Main executable leveraging libraries.zip library.zip Custom communication library for interaction with Triconex controllers.
Table 1: Description of
TRITON Malware Incident Summary
The attacker gained remote access to an SIS engineering workstation and deployed the TRITON attack framework to reprogram the SIS controllers.
During the incident, some SIS controllers entered a failed safe state, which automatically shutdown the industrial process and prompted the asset owner to initiate an investigation.
The investigation found that the SIS controllers initiated a safe shutdown when application code between redundant processing units failed a validation check -- resulting in an MP diagnostic failure message.
We assess with moderate confidence that the attacker inadvertently shutdown operations while developing the ability to cause physical damage for the following reasons: Modifying the SIS could prevent it from functioning correctly, increasing the likelihood of a failure that would result in physical consequences.