To be absolutely sure your phone isn’t tracking you or listening in on any conversations, you might turn it off.

It seems logical; that way, even if the phone is infected with serious spyware, it can’t do anything.

In addition, turning off or restarting a smartphone is one of the most reliable ways to fight such infections; in many cases, spyware “lives” only until the next reboot because it cannot gain a permanent foothold in the operating system.

At the same time, the vulnerabilities that allow malware to work even after a reboot are rare and expensive to exploit.

However, this tactic might not work forever.

Researchers have come up with a technique to bypass it using a method they have named NoReboot.

In essence, this attack is a fake restart.

What is NoReboot, and how does the attack work?

We want to note right off the bat that NoReboot is not a feature of any real spyware in use by attackers; rather, it’s a so-called proof of concept that researchers demonstrated under laboratory conditions.

At this point it is hard to say whether the method will actually gain traction.

For the demonstration, the researchers used an iPhone they “infected” beforehand.

Unfortunately, they haven’t shared the technical details.

Here’s what happens in the demonstration: The spy malware, which transfers the image from the camera, runs on the iPhone; The user tries to shut off the phone the usual way, using the power and volume buttons; The malware takes control and shows a perfect fake instead of the standard iOS shutdown screen; After the user drags the power-off slider, which also looks perfectly normal, the smartphone’s screen goes dark and the phone no longer responds to any of the user’s actions; When the user presses the power button again, the malware displays a perfect replica of the iOS boot animation.

During the entire process, the phone is continually transferring the image from the phone’s front camera to another device without the user’s knowledge.

As is often the case, seeing is believing, and we recommend checking out the researchers’ video: How to protect yourself against NoReboot Again, at least for now NoReboot is only a demonstration of the feasibility of an attack.

The attack is alarming, to be sure, but don’t forget that malware needs to get onto a smartphone before it can do any damage.

Here are some tips to help you prevent that from happening: Keep in mind that it’s much harder for attackers to infect a smartphone remotely than if they have physical access to it.

Be careful not to let someone else get hold of your smartphone — especially for a long period of time — and install a reliable device lock.

People most often install malware on their smartphones on their own, voluntarily.

Be careful about what you download and avoid installing unnecessary apps — that is, those you can easily live without — as a general rule.

Don’t root or jailbreak your smartphone (at least if you haven’t been using *nix systems for many years).

Superuser rights make malware’s work exponentially easier .

If you have an Android device, we recommend installing an antivirus solution — to block Trojans from penetrating the system.

Let your smartphone die a natural death from time to time — that is, wait for the charge to run out completely.

The phone will then most certainly restart without any fakes, and there’s an excellent chance that spies will disappear from the system.

You can speed up the process by using a resource-hungry app, such as a game or benchmark-test utility.




