Amazon is a popular online retailer serving millions of users.

Unfortunately, FireEye mobile security researchers have found security issues within Amazon’s mobile apps on both Android and iOS platforms through which attackers can crack the passwords of target Amazon accounts.

Amazon confirmed our findings and hot fixed the issue.

Recently, we found two security issues within Amazon’s mobile apps on both Android and iOS platforms: No limitation or CAPTCHA for password attempts Weak password policy Attackers can exploit these two security issues remotely against target Amazon accounts.

Figure 1.

Verification Code for Wrong Password Attempts A CAPTCHA (\"Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart\") is a challenge-response test designed to determine whether the user is a human.

CAPTCHAs are well adopted for preventing programmed bots from accessing online services for bad purposes, such as conducting denial-of-service attacks, harvesting information and cracking passwords.

The web version of Amazon requires the user to complete a CAPTCHA after ten incorrect password attempts (Figure 1), to prevent password cracking.

However, Amazon’s mobile apps haven’t adopted such protection using CAPTCHA (Figure 2 and Figure 3).

This design flaw provides attackers the chance to crack any Amazon account’s password using brute force.

Figure 2.

Amazon Android App Figure 3.

Amazon iOS

App

Furthermore, Amazon doesn’t have a strong password strength requirement.

It accepts commonly used weak passwords such as \"123456\" and \"111111\".

We know that the weaker the password, the easier for hackers to break into an account.

Therefore, allowing weak passwords puts account safety to potential security risks.

Given that there are many well-known previous password leakages , attackers can use these password leakages as knowledge bases to conduct password cracking.

As a proof of concept, we figured out the password of one Amazon account we setup within 1000 attempts, using the latest version (2.8.0) of Amazon’s Android shopping client.

After receiving our vulnerability report, Amazon hot fixed the first issue by patching their server.

Now if the user tries multiple incorrect passwords, the server will block the user from login (Figure 4).

In the future, we suggest adding CAPTCHA support for Amazon mobile (Android and iOS)

apps, and enforcing requirements for stronger passwords.

Figure 4.

Wrong Password Block Subscribe to Blogs Get email updates as new blog posts are added.




