By Christiaan Beek and Raj Samani on Aug 14, 2018 The latest update to the McAfee® ePolicy Orchestrator® platform offers a new add-in to provide insight into the latest analysis carried out by McAfee Labs and the Advanced Threat Research team.

The Security Resources section of the McAfee ePO ™ console Version 5.10.0 will contain multiple windows providing the latest news.

The first window in the section shows an updated list of the most recent threats research published by the McAfee Labs team.

This includes both malware and vulnerability research.

For example, this week we released a report that shows it is possible to emulate and modify a patient’s vital signs in real time on a medical network using a patient monitor and central monitoring station.

We also include research related to new malware campaigns.

All our content is mapped to the MITRE ATT&CK framework and includes all known indicators of compromise, as well as detailing how McAfee products protect against the documented campaign.

Top threats The section includes a condensed version of the Threat Landscape Dashboard , which contains the top threats across exploit kits, campaigns, ransomware, and vulnerabilities.

The following screen shows how the summary will appear in the McAfee ePO console, allowing readers to easily review and click through these threats for more detail.

The latest McAfee ePO console will offer an easy review of analysis gathered by McAfee Labs and the Advanced Threat Research team.

Top stories Want to know more?

The Top Stories section offers the latest information from McAfee news sources, including new product releases and new blog content (beyond threats analysis).

Support and product advisories At the bottom right of the screen you will find Security Product Advisories: Support Notification Service: McAfee SNS is a proactive notification service that allows McAfee to communicate critical information in a timely manner on product upgrades, releases, and end-of-life notices.

SNS is a vital information link during critical incidents, providing you with the updates you need to ensure that your systems and organization are protected.

Product Security Bulletins : McAfee is focused on ensuring the security of our customers’ computers, networks, devices, and data.

We are committed to rapidly addressing issues as they arise, and providing recommendations through security bulletins and knowledgebase articles.

McAfee Labs Security Advisories : These are a free notification service backed by our global research team.

McAfee Labs Security Advisories map high-profile threats to the McAfee technologies that protect your environment.

What next?

You can expect the dashboard to evolve and provide more detail in future versions.

Please let us know what you would like to see.




